# 3.5.5 Packet Tracer – Investigate the TCP/IP and OSI Models in Action

#### Objectives

- Part 1: Examine HTTP Web Traffic
- Part 2: Display Elements of the TCP/IP Protocol Suite

#### Background

This simulation activity is intended to provide a foundation for  understanding the TCP/IP protocol suite and the relationship to the OSI  model. **Simulation** mode allows you to view the data contents being sent across the network at each layer.

As data moves through the network, it is broken down into smaller  pieces and identified so that the pieces can be put back together when  they arrive at the destination. Each piece is assigned a specific name  (protocol data unit [PDU]) and associated with a specific layer of the  TCP/IP and OSI models. Packet Tracer **Simulation** mode enables you  to view each of the layers and the associated PDU. The following steps  lead the user through the process of requesting a web page from a web  server by using the web browser application available on a client PC.

Even though much of the information displayed will be discussed in  more detail later, this is an opportunity to explore the functionality  of Packet Tracer and be able to visualize the encapsulation process.

## Part 1: Examine HTTP Web Traffic

#### Step 1: Switch from Realtime to **Simulation** mode.

a. Click the **Simulation** mode icon to switch from **Realtime** mode to **Simulation** mode.

b. Select **HTTP** from the **Event List Filters**.

#### Step 2: Generate web (HTTP) traffic.

c. In the URL field, enter **www.osi.local** and click **Go**.
 Because time in **Simulation** mode is event-driven, you must use the **Capture/Forward** button to display network events. The capture forward button is located at the left hand side of the blue band that is below the topology  window. Of the three buttons there, it is the one on the right.

d. Click **Capture/Forward** four times. There should be four events in the Event List.
 Look at the Web Client web browser page. Did anything change?
 The web page was returned from the web server.

#### Step 3: Explore the contents of the HTTP packet.

The **PDU Information at Device: Web Client** window displays. In this window, there are only two tabs (**OSI Model** and **Outbound PDU Details**) because this is the start of the transmission. As more events are  examined, there will be three tabs displayed, adding a tab for **Inbound PDU Details**. When an event is the last event in the stream of traffic, only the **OSI Model** and **Inbound PDU Details** tabs are displayed.

b. Ensure that the **OSI Model** tab is selected.

Under the **Out Layers** column, click **Layer 7**.

>  What information is listed in the numbered steps directly below the **In Layers** and **Out Layers** boxes for Layer 7?
>
>  *“1. The HTTP client sends a HTTP request to the server.”*

> What is the **Dst Port** value for **Layer 4** under the **Out Layers** column?
>
>  *80*

>  What is the Dest. IP value for Layer 3 under the Out Layers column?
>
>  *192.168.1.254*

> What information is displayed at Layer 2 under the Out Layers column?
>
>  *Layer 2 Ethernet II Header and inbound and outbound MAC addresses.*

c. Click the **Outbound PDU Details** tab.

Information listed under the **PDU Formats** is reflective of the layers within the TCP/IP model.

**Note**: The information listed under the **Ethernet II** section of the Outbound PDU Details tab provides even more detailed information than is listed under Layer 2 on the **OSI Model** tab. The **Outbound PDU Details** provides more descriptive and detailed information. The values under **DEST MAC** and **SRC MAC** within the **Ethernet II** section of the **PDU Details** appear on the **OSI Model** tab under Layer 2, but are not identified as such.

> What is the common information listed under the IP section of PDU  Details as compared to the information listed under the OSI Model tab?  With which layer is it associated?
>
> *SRC IP and DST IP at Layer 3*

> What is the common information listed under the TCP section of PDU  Details, as compared to the information listed under the OSI Model tab,  and with which layer is it associated?
>
> *SRC PORT and DEST PORT at Layer 4*

> What is the Host listed under the HTTP section of the PDU Details?  What layer would this information be associated with under the OSI Model tab?
>
> *www.osi.local, Layer 7* 

e. Advance to the next HTTP **Type** box within the **Event List** and click the colored square box. This window contains both **In Layers** and **Out Layers**. Notice the direction of the arrow directly under the **In Layers** column; it is pointing upward, indicating the direction the data is  traveling. Scroll through these layers making note of the items  previously viewed. At the top of the column the arrow points to the  right. This denotes that the server is now sending the information back  to the client.

> Comparing the information displayed in the **In Layers** column with that of the **Out Layers** column, what are the major differences?  
>
> *The Src and Dst Ports, Src and Dst IPs and MAC addresses have been swapped.*

f. Click the **Inbound and Outbound PDU Details** tab. Review the PDU details.

g. Click the last colored square box under the **Info** column.

> How many tabs are displayed with this event? Explain.
>
> *Just 2, one for the OSI Model and one for Inbound PDU Details because this is the receiving device.*

### Part 2: Display Elements of the TCP/IP Protocol Suite

#### Step 1: View Additional Events

a. Close any open PDU information windows.

b. In the **Event List Filters** > **Visible Events** section, click **Show All/None**.

> What additional Event Types are displayed?
>
> *Depending on whether any communications  has occurred prior to starting the original simulation, there should now be entries for ARP, DNS, TCP and HTTP. It is possible that the ARP  entries may not show, depending on what a student may have done prior to going to **Simulation** mode. If the activity is started from scratch all of those will be listed.*

These extra entries play various roles within the TCP/IP suite.  Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) requests MAC addresses for destination hosts. DNS is responsible for converting a name (for example, **www.osi.local**) to an IP address. The additional TCP events are responsible for  connecting, agreeing on communication parameters, and disconnecting the  communications sessions between the devices. These protocols have been  mentioned previously and will be further discussed as the course  progresses. Currently there are over 35 possible protocols (event types) available for capture within Packet Tracer.

c. Click the first DNS event in the **Type** column. Explore the **OSI Model** and **PDU Detail** tabs and note the encapsulation process. As you look at the **OSI Model** tab with **Layer 7** highlighted, a description of what is occurring is listed directly below the **In Layers** and **Out Layers** (“1. The DNS client sends a DNS query to the DNS server.”). This is  very useful information to help understand what is occurring during the  communication process.

d. Click the **Outbound PDU Details** tab.

> What information is listed in the NAME field: in the DNS QUERY section?
>
> *www.osi.local*

e. Click the last DNS **Info** colored square box in the event list.

> At which device was the PDU captured?
>
> *The Web Client*

> What is the value listed next to **ADDRESS**: in the DNS ANSWER section of the **Inbound PDU Details**?
>
> *192.168.1.254 – the address of the Web Server*

f. Find the first **HTTP** event in the list and click the colored square box of the **TCP** event immediately following this event. Highlight **Layer 4** in the **OSI Model** tab.

> In the numbered list directly below the In Layers and Out Layers, what is the information displayed under items 4 and 5?
>
> *4 The TCP connection is successful. 5. The device sets the connection state to ESTABLISHED.*

TCP manages the connecting and disconnecting of the communications  channel along with other responsibilities. This particular event shows  that the communication channel has been ESTABLISHED.

g. Click the last TCP event. Highlight Layer 4 in the **OSI Model** tab. Examine the steps listed directly below **In Layers** and **Out Layers**.

> What is the purpose of this event, based on the information provided in the last item in the list (should be item 4)?
>
> *CLOSING the connection*

### Challenge Questions

This simulation provided an example of a web session between a client and a server on a local area network (LAN). The client makes requests  to specific services running on the server. The server must be set up to listen on specific ports for a client request. (Hint: Look at Layer 4  in the **OSI Model** tab for port information.)

> Based on the information that was inspected during the Packet Tracer capture, what port number is the **Web Server** listening on for the web request?
>
> *The first HTTP PDU being requested by the Web Client shows port 80 under the layer 4 DST port*.

> What port is the Web Server listening on for a DNS request?
>
> *The first DNS PDU being requested by the Web Client shows a layer 4 destination of port 53.*